GERD

What is GERD ? Sometimes, after eating a large meal or lying down too soon after eating, you might feel acid coming up into your throat. This is called gastroesophageal reflux (GER). It happens when the muscle at the end of your esophagus (the tube that carries food from your mouth to your stomach) doesn't close properly. Stomach contents can then move back up and irritate the esophagus. Having reflux occasionally is common. But if you have symptoms two or more times a week or if they cause damage to the lining of your esophagus, you may have gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD). GERD is a chronic (long-lasting) condition that can cause discomfort and, over time, lead to other health problems. Anyone can have GERD , including infants and children. What causes GERD ? GERD can happen when the muscle at the bottom of your esophagus becomes weak or relaxes at the wrong time. You are more likely to have GERD if you: Are overweight or have obesity Are pregnant Smoke or are around secondhand smoke Have a hiatal hernia (when part of the stomach pushes up into the chest) Certain foods, drinks, or medicines can also make GERD worse. What are common symptoms of GERD ? The most common symptom of GERD is heartburn. This is a burning feeling in your chest or throat. You can also have GERD without having heartburn. Other symptoms may include: Tasting acid or food in the back of your mouth A dry cough or hoarse voice Asthma-like symptoms Trouble swallowing Get medical help right away if you have chest pain with shortness of breath, or pain in your jaw or arm. These can be signs of a heart problem. How is GERD diagnosed? Your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They may recommend tests such as: Upper GI endoscopy to look at the esophagus and stomach lining with a tiny camera. Biopsy to check a small tissue sample. X-Ray to take pictures of the upper digestive system. Esophageal pH test to measure how often acid backs up the esophagus and how long the acid stays there. Esophageal manometry to check how well your esophagus moves food when you swallow. Transnasal esophagoscopy to look for damage to the esophagus by using a small tube with a camera. How is GERD treated? Most people can manage GERD with lifestyle changes and medicine. In rare cases, surgery is needed. Lifestyle changes can include: Eating smaller meals and avoiding lying down for at least 2-3 hours after eating Avoiding foods that trigger symptoms, such as spicy foods, chocolate, caffeine, or fatty foods Losing weight if needed Raising the head of your bed Quitting smoking Medicines can include: Over-the-counter medicines, such as antacids Prescription medicines If not treated, GERD can cause problems like inflammation of the esophagus, scarring, or changes in the tissue lining (Barrett's esophagus). It can also worsen asthma or cause chronic (long-term) cough or hoarseness. Can GERD be prevented? You may be able to improve symptoms of GERD by: Avoiding alcohol and trigger foods Eating smaller meals Not eating close to bedtime Wearing loose-fitting clothes Sleeping on your left side or raising the head of your bed Maintaining a healthy weight NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Source: MedlinePlus.gov — https://medlineplus.gov/gerd.html